???????
‘Commander, preparing for jump to hyperspace in 3…2...1…’ The space around the ship dissolved into white streaks of light as it plunged into nothingness. Light years passed in the blink of an eye while the ship continued its journey amidst the flashing stars.
It all started with Star Trek; we all remember the warp drive, or the Millennium Falcon from Star Wars.
A
1994 paper
by Mexican theoretical physicist Miguel Alcubierre
proposed such a metric called a warp drive. Expansion and contraction of spacetime (spacetime is a mathematical model that fuses the three dimensions of space and one dimension of time into a four-dimensional system, which can be represented in the form of a fabric, which undergoes distortion in the presence of mass) does not have a speed limit, thus the laws of general relativity were not broken. Alcubierre’s warp creates a peculiar distortion of space such that the region directly in front of the spacecraft experiences the most contraction of space, while the region behind the spacecraft experiences the most expansion of space. This is analogous to the scenario during the Big Bang: behind the moving volume, new space is created (expanding universe), while in front of the moving volume, space is annihilated (collapsing to Big Crunch). This region of distortion is called a warp bubble, and it travels in the form of a wave. Any object inside this wave would be able to travel along with the bubble.
Warp drives create the bubble by curving spacetime around that bubble to reduce distances. When the field is active, the field’s boost results in a much higher apparent speed, as measured by  an earthbound observer. Within the shell thickness of the warp bubble region, the spacecraft never locally breaks the speed of light. The net effect as seen by earth observers is analogous to watching a movie in Fast Forward.
For the interested folks, here’s a link to an intriguing simulation of how spacetime would be affected at different speeds of the drive!
movement of warp drive
Energy density for the metric is negative, which will add an effective negative mass to the spacecraft’s overall mass budget. As the amount of negative mass increases, the specific mass of the spacecraft approaches zero, and the transit time becomes exceedingly small, approaching zero.
By the relativistic mass equation, giving a fast object even more kinetic energy has the main effect of causing an increase in mass- energy, rather than speed. But this is not a problem for us. The interior of the bubble is the inertial reference frame for any object inhabiting it. Thus the ship is not moving within this bubble, but is being carried along as the region itself moves. So there is no relativistic mass increase or time dilation effects.
The situation of Alcubierre drive is similar to that of stable wormholes. They both are solutions of equations of general relativity, but would need exotic matter for existence. We require negative mass for the production of such a distortion of spacetime. To create negative energy, warp drive would use a huge amount of mass to create an imbalance between particles and antiparticles. Alcubierre estimated that to generate enough energy for a 100-meter warp bubble, the mass of the entire visible universe will be required.
If you wish to dive deeper into the mathematical aspect of a warp drive, check out this report behind the physics and maths of a warp drive!
warp drive
Now, now. What would happen to other interstellar objects that happen to lie in the path of an Alcubierre drive and enter the region of distorted spacetime at the leading edge of the warp, where space is rapidly collapsing? The nuclei of any matter transiting that region would first experience enormous compressional forces and then explode in a flood of pi mesons and other fundamental particles when the compression forces were released, stealing energy from the warp field in the process.
All of us don’t exactly have access to the Arrakis-based drug- spice, so until we develop the right technology that could render interstellar travel possible, humans can only endeavor for deep space travel, discovering civilizations that earlier have laid buried within the depths of the star-clad Milky Way.