???????
Large organizations that deal with space exploration as well as individual enthusiasts have grown in number as a result of astronomy's constant contribution to humanity's ability to develop interests in realms beyond the realm of the imagination. Without travel, any exploration is like a body without blood. Comparably, space travel was an essential part of it that advanced astronomy to unprecedented levels, but it wasn't as simple as it seemed. In addition to human sacrifices, animals and insects are also offered. Though it appears strange, this is the reality upon which our base is built, and it is something that both we and the next generation of space enthusiasts should be proud of.
1] ALBERT II-
The first primate and mammal in space was a male rhesus macaque monkey. On June 14, 1949, he was launched aboard the U.S. V-2 sounding rocket from Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico, United States, reaching an altitude of 83 miles. Albert's capsule crashed into the earth quickly upon reentry due to a parachute failure. Data on Albert's heart and breathing were captured right up until the point of impact. On December 8, the final monkey V-2 mission also resulted in a catastrophic failure claiming the life of Albert IV, the second animal in space. Fruit flies were the only known living things in space before Albert II. They were sent into suborbital flight on February 20, 1947, by the United States using a V-2 rocket to study about the effects of radiation on living beings. The flies were recovered alive.
2] MISS BAKER & ABLE-
The US Army launched a squirrel monkey named Gordo, sometimes known as Old Reliable, on Jupiter AM-13 on December 13, 1958, but unfortunately he didn’t live to tell the tale. Gordo was killed when the parachute recovery mechanism in the rocket nose cone malfunctioned mechanically after landing in the South Atlantic after traveling more than 1,500 miles and reaching a height of 310 miles before landing back on Earth
. On May 28, 1959, Miss Baker, a squirrel monkey from Peru, and Able, a rhesus macaque, successfully finished their journey aboard the Jupiter AM-18. In 16 minutes, the trip covered 1500 miles and experienced 9 minutes of weightlessness. Baker became the first monkey to endure the strains and consequences of space travel. Able experienced a reaction to anesthesia while the electrodes that were placed to monitor his vital signs and physical responses were being removed, and as a result, he died four days after the flight from an uncommon atrial fibrillation.
3] LAIKA-
Before man went to space, the Soviet Space Program experimented by sending dogs. In 1957, a street dog from Moscow became the first living being to orbit the Earth aboard the Soviet Union's Sputnik 2 spacecraft. It was the second spacecraft ever sent into orbit around the planet. The dog underwent surgery, during which medical devices were implanted to track heartbeats, respiration rates, blood pressure, and body movements. She wore a spacesuit with integrated metal restraints and was equipped with sensors. When the spacecraft lifted off on November 3 at 5:30 a.m., gravitational forces were five times stronger than they would have been otherwise. She managed to enter orbit and completed her orbit in roughly 103 minutes. On April 4, 1958, after 2570 orbits of the Earth, Laika's capsule burst into flames in the atmosphere.
4] BELKA & STRELKA-
According to reports, the Soviet Union launched dogs into flight 71 times between 1951 and 1966, with 17 deaths. Lisichka and Chayka were the two dogs that were sent into orbit in 1960. The flight ended in a catastrophe and the dogs’ death as the combustion chamber fell apart at the 23
rd
second of the flight. Learning from this, it was decided that an ejecting capsule would be supplied to the dogs so they could catapult to safety if something went off the line. This was the only change made 20 days prior to the launch of the pair of dogs Belka and Strelka that spent a day in space aboard Korabl-Sputnik 2 on 19 August, 1960 before safely returning to Earth. They are the first higher-living organisms to survive an orbital trip in outer space. During takeoff, the vital signs showed higher heart rates and breathing but the moment the ship reached the orbit, the indicators showed that the pair was fine. They were accompanied by a grey rabbit, mice, two rats, flies, and several plants and fungi. All of them survived.
5] HAM
- In July, 1959, Ham was transferred to Holloman Air Force Base in Alamogordo, New Mexico so that it could be trained for space flight as a part of Project Mercury. The training included long periods of confinement in a chair and learning about the operation of levers in response to light cues. The chimpanzee was given the title of The Astrochimp and was the first great ape to be launched into space on 31 January, 1961. He was strapped into a container called a “couch”. Ham flew a suborbital flight on Mercury spacecraft #5 during the Mercury-Redstone 2 mission, part of the U.S. space program that lasted for 16 and a half minutes which included 6 and a half minutes of weightlessness. He travelled at a speed of 5800 mph, to a height of 157 miles above the earth and despite the intense speed, gravitational forces, and rigours of space flight, Ham performed his tasks correctly.
6] HECTOR-
He was a mouse and also the first French Astronaut to be launched into space on 22 February, 1961 making France the third country to launch animals in space after the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Hector was sent equipped with implanted electrodes on his skull to monitor neurological activity. The mission aimed to analyse brain reactions to changes in gravity. Two more rats were flown in October, 1962.
Another rat mission by the Soviet Union on 19 August 1960. Russian scientists sent a pair of white lab rats on Sputnik 5, joined by 42 mice, some fruit flies, and two dogs. The cabin re-entered the atmosphere after 17 orbits on 20 August and was successfully recovered. All previous missions ended in catastrophic explosions.
7] FELICETTE-
She was the first cat to be launched into space. It was a stray Parisian cat who remains the only one to be successfully launched into space on 18 October, 1963 as a part of the French space program. The launch was done using the Veronique AGI 47-sounding rocket designed for carrying space passengers. The preparations for the mission included enduring Gravitational forces within a centrifuge and an extended period of confinement within small containers. The cat was named C341 to avoid emotional attachment and was later bestowed as “Felicette”. Her journey into the cosmos was a brief but pivotal 15 minute-voyage to Earth’s suborbital space with the cat experiencing around 5 minutes of weightlessness, during which her breathing and heart rate were carefully monitored through a series of implanted electrodes.
Sadly, two months later, the cat was taken for an autopsy. The reason given was to study the physical aftereffects of space travel on the brain but nothing useful was concluded. Another cat was launched into space on October 24, but due to a rocket malfunction, it crashed, resulting in the cat’s death.
8]  RUSSIAN TORTOISE-
The first Earthlings to orbit the moon were two tortoises from the Soviet Union. They were launched on spacecraft Zond 5 on 14 September, 1968. The tortoises were sent along with bacteria, algae strains, flowering plants, flies, mealworms, and other biological specimens. Four days into the mission, the tortoises and their travel companions circled the moon. The long journey came to an end 1 week later on 21 September, 1968 when the vessel splashed down the Indian Ocean. Fortunately, both the tortoises survived the journey. They had lost about 10% of their body weight during the mission but remained active and showed no loss of appetite.
9]  ANITA & ARABELLA-
Two female orb-weaving cross spiders named Anita and Arabella, who produced webs of nearly concentric circles, were selected for the experiment. They were sent into space on 28 July, 1973 on the Skylab 3 mission to the US Skylab space station. These spiders did construct normal-looking webs in space but were not as structured as the webs made on Earth and the silk was finer than on Earth due to the spider’s adaptation to the changed gravitational force. Anita died during the extended period of the mission and Arabella died back on earth, the reason supposedly given as dehydration. It is interesting to note that the Skylab mission was a student project by Judy Miles who wanted to know if spiders could spin webs in near-weightlessness.