“The sight filled the northern sky; the immensity of it was scarcely conceivable. As if from Heaven itself, great curtains of delicate light hung and trembled. “ ~Philip Pullman
Have you ever seen the undulating waves of green, purple, and red lights dance in the skies and wondered what it is? The mysterious phenomenon is worth watching at least once in your life! This is Aurora Borealis. That is, when this phenomenon occurs near the North Pole, it's referred to as Aurora Borealis, and when near the South Pole, it's Aurora Australis.
Do you have any theories about how it occurs? A few? None? Not to worry, even ancient civilisations came up with their origin myths when they looked up to marvel at this celestial phenomenon. American Inuit's suggested that the lights were spirits playing with a walrus’ head, while the Vikings thought that it was the light reflecting off Valkyrie's armour. It has been documented by astronomers worldwide through the centuries, from Babylon in the 6th century BCE to China in the 2nd century BCE.
This rare event, generally observed near poles, was observed in India for the first time on 22 and 23 of April. Indian Astronomical Observatory in Hanle, southeastern Ladakh, one of the world's highest-located sites for optical, infrared, and gamma-ray telescopes, captured this visually amazing event with its 360-degree camera. The IAO also said that the lights weren’t just a conventional aurora but a “Stable auroral red (SAR)” arc. It was a beautiful band of red light seen in the sky. SAR was static and monochromatic, unlike auroras, where various colours appear in moving patterns.
The reason why aurora happens is our Sun which constantly spews energy and particles. Solar winds and storms send huge clouds of magnetically charged particles that can travel millions of miles to Earth. We don't notice them because the protective magnetic field around Earth shields us from most of the detritus, most of which is deflected away. But some get captured in the magnetic field, accelerating towards the north and south poles into the atmosphere. This is why aurora activity is concentrated at the magnetic poles. There they interact with gases in the atmosphere, heating and making them glow, resulting in beautiful displays of light in the sky. Oxygen gives off green and red lights. Nitrogen glows blue and purple.
However, the appearance of Auroras in India is quite rare since auroras are primarily associated with high-latitude regions closer to the Earth's poles. The occurrence of the Northern Lights in India, particularly in regions like Ladakh, can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly, intense geomagnetic storms (measured a four on a scale of five). Secondly, India's geographical location near the northern hemisphere makes it more prone to experiencing occasional glimpses of the Northern Lights during strong geomagnetic events.
Interestingly, Auroras are not just something that happens on Earth. A planet with an atmosphere and a magnetic field will have auroras. We've also seen amazing auroras on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune!
So star-gazers and travel junkies, add Ladakh to your bucket list and prepare for a visual feast!