???????
A Closer Review of the Big Bang Theory
Introduction
Around 13.8 billion years ago, the universe expanded faster than the speed of light for a fraction of a second, a period called cosmic inflation. Scientists aren’t sure what came before inflation or what powered it. Cosmologists think inflation explains many aspects of the universe we observe today, like its flatness, or lack of curvature, on the largest scales. Inflation may have also magnified density differences occurring naturally on space’s smallest, quantum-level scales, which eventually helped form the universe’s large-scale structure.
The Genesis of the Theory
In 1927, Belgian astronomer Georges Lemaître proposed that the universe was expanding, which implied that it was once compacted into a single point. This idea gained support in 1929 when American astronomer Edwin Hubble discovered that galaxies are moving away from each other, with their speed proportional to their distance. Additionally, the abundance of light elements like hydrogen and helium in the universe correlates well with what would be expected from conditions following an initial rapid expansion event.
Early Conditions
At about one-hundredth of a second, the earliest time we can speak confidently, the universe's temperature was about a hundred thousand million degrees Centigrade. This is much hotter than in the center of even the hottest star, so hot that none of the components of ordinary matter, molecules or atoms, or even the nuclei of atoms, could have held together. One type of particle that was present in large numbers is the electron, Another type of particle that was abundant at early times is the positron, a positively charged particle with precisely the same mass as the electron. The number of positrons was almost exactly equal to the number of electrons. In addition to electrons and positrons, there were roughly similar numbers of various kinds of neutrinos, ghostly particles with no mass or electric charge.
Nucleosynthesis
One second after the Big Bang, the universe consisted of an extremely hot 10 billion degrees Celsius. In the following minutes, in an era called nucleosynthesis, protons and neutrons collided and produced the earliest elements – hydrogen, helium, and traces of lithium and beryllium. After five minutes, most of today’s helium had formed, and the universe had expanded and cooled enough that further element formation stopped.
Cosmic Microwave Background
About 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the universe cooled enough for electrons and protons to combine into neutral hydrogen atoms, allowing photons to travel freely. This "decoupling" of matter and radiation left an imprint known as the cosmic microwave background, a faint glow observable in all directions, which provides a snapshot of the universe at that early stage.
After the cosmic microwave background, the universe again became opaque at shorter wavelengths due to the absorbing effects of all those hydrogen atoms. For the next 200 million years the universe remained dark. There were no stars to shine. The cosmos at this point consisted of a sea of hydrogen atoms, helium, and trace amounts of heavier elements.
Formation of stars
At the end of the first three minutes, the contents of the universe were mostly in the form of light, neutrinos, and antineutrinos. Now consisting of about 73 percent hydrogen and 27 percent helium, and an equally small number of electrons left over from the era of electron-positron annihilation. This matter continued to rush apart, becoming steadily cooler and less dense.
Gas was not uniformly distributed throughout the universe. Cooler areas of space were lumpier, with denser clouds of gas. As these clumps grew more massive, their gravity attracted additional matter. As they became denser and more compact, the centers of these clumps became hotter – hot enough eventually that nuclear fusion occurred in their centers. These were the first stars. They were 30 to 300 times more massive than our Sun and millions of times brighter. Over several hundred million years, the first stars collected to become the first galaxies.
The future
For many years, scientists thought the universe’s current expansion was slowing down. But in fact, cosmic expansion is speeding up. In 1998, astronomers found that certain supernovae, bright stellar explosions, were fainter than expected. They concluded this could only happen if the supernovae had moved farther away faster than predicted. Scientists suspect a mysterious substance that they call dark energy, is accelerating expansion. Future research may yield new surprises, but cosmologists suggest the universe will likely continue to expand forever.