Celestial Wisdom of Ancient India
Ancient India’s contributions to astronomy are well-known and documented. The earliest references to astronomy are found in Rig-Veda, dated between 4500 BC. There are astronomical references listed chronologically in the Vedas. There are also various mysteries and wonders in Indian astronomy. Let us look at the history and some major achievements of Indian astronomy.
The Rig Veda is one of the oldest pieces of Indian literature. Rig Veda 1-64-11 & 48 describes time as a wheel with 12 parts and 360 spokes (days), with a remainder of 5, referring to the solar calendar.
Greek astronomical ideas began to enter India in the 4th century BCE following the conquest of Alexander the Great. Later astronomers mention the existence of various Siddhantas during this period, among them a text known as the Surya Siddhanta. These were not fixed texts but rather an oral tradition of knowledge, and their content needs to be more extensive. Today, The text known as Surya Siddhanta(SS) was dated to the Gupta period and was received by Aryabhatta. The SS approximately mentions the tilt of the earth as 23.5º.
An injustice would be done to Indian astronomy without the mention of the great astronomer mathematician Aryabhatta. Aryabhatta explicitly mentioned that the Earth rotates about its axis, thereby causing what appears to be an apparent westward motion of the stars. In his book, Aryabhata, he suggested that the Earth was a sphere containing a circumference of 24,835 miles (39,967 km). Aryabhata also mentioned that reflected sunlight is the cause behind the shining of the Moon. By the time of Aryabhatta, planets' motion was treated as elliptical rather than circular. He observed that though the stars move in a circular motion around the Earth, the moon, planets, and other heavenly bodies don't seem so. Through his mathematical tools and calculation, he presented the epicyclic (An epicycle is an orbit revolving around a point on the boundary) planetary and eccentric planetary motion around the sun. This corrected the various misconceptions of the earth being flat. It is the centre of the universe, and various other misconceptions that existed until the late 19th century were already proven wrong by Indian astronomy very before.
In the 18th century, Maharaja Jai Singh took a great interest in astronomy. He made various Jantar Mantar In various cities in India. These comprise live astronomical clocks for days, eclipses, and visibility of key constellations. Also, his Samrat Yantra, the largest sundial in the world, divides each daylit hour into 15-minute, 1-minute and 6-second solar subunits.