???????
HOW DO WE EVEN MEASURE DISTANCE IN SPACE?
With the advent of the James Webb telescope and the exponential boom within the realm of space exploration, a path has been paved for world changing discoveries. Let's start our own investigation by asking a fundamental question: How do we even measure distance in space?
The night sky is filled with celestial objects which are at incomprehensible distances from us. Measuring such distances using everyday methods is out of the question. In spite of that, since the dawn of time; Scientists have found indigenous ways to tackle this problem. Here are five methods through which we measure how far away things are, each level an extrapolation of its previous.
1)
RADAR RANGING:
The first one and most basic is Radar ranging. The underlying idea is to send light towards the object and detect the time it takes the light to return back to its point of origin after reflection. Multiplying the time difference with the speed of light and dividing by two gives us the distance of the object from Earth. RADAR was already invented a few decades back, before someone attempted to transmit a signal to the moon and detect its echo. However, detecting that echo is extremely difficult and we had to install reflectors on the moon before we were able to precisely measure the distance. The furthest we have been able to measure with this method is Saturn. The restriction comes from the inverse Square Law, which puts a limit to light's intensity. The atmosphere also poses some difficulties.
2)
STELLAR PARALLAX:
Stellar parallax is the apparent shift of position of the object against the background of distant stars. Within a six-month period, we capture a picture of the star (object) and measure the difference in angle between the two images. Plug in a little trigonometry, and we can determine the distance of the object from the Earth. This method has only ever been partially successful and can only be used for nearby celestial objects. The further we travel deeper into space, the smaller the angle gets, which in effect decreases our accuracy. Today we have ways to increase the borders of our range limits, as with the Gaia space probe (2013), but the errors still remain, and the maximum we can detect is to about 200 light years.
3)
STANDARD CANDLES (CEPHEID VARIABLES):
Another method to measure the distance is to combine the above two and detect the brightness of the star to deduce its distance. A standard candle is a star or another bright object with known luminosity, that can be used as a standard to infer distance. This is where Cepheid Variables come into the equation.
A Cepheid variable is a type of variable star that pulsates radially, varying in both diameter and temperature. It changes in brightness, with a well-defined stable period and amplitude. We could input those changes in the cycle and calculate a peak brightness which is an actual brightness of that star. We detected a lot of such stars in the range that parallax works. We can utilize that information to calibrate the Cepheid Variable cycle and resolve it to about a hundred million light years. These are used for scaling galactic and intergalactic distances.
4)
TYPE IA SUPERNOVA:
Another standard candle that we make use of in measuring distance is the Type Ia supernova. A Type Ia supernova is a type of supernova that occurs in binary systems (two stars orbiting one another) in which one of the stars is a white dwarf. The other star can be anything from a giant star to an even smaller white dwarf. When the two stars in the Binary system are in close proximity to each other, the white dwarf can syphon mass from its partner.
When such a phenomenon occurs, the dwarf star grows in size until it is about 1.4 solar masses, at which point it explodes as a supernova. This category of supernova produces a fairly consistent peak luminosity due to the fixed critical mass at which a white dwarf will explode. Using this information, these explosions can be used to determine the distance to their host galaxies. We have detected these supernovas in the Cepheid variable's range and we can calibrate the luminosity of type Ia supernovae to traverse further in space to a maximum of 3 billion light years.
5)
COSMOLOGICAL REDSHIFT:
The only thing left after type Ia supernovae is Redshift, and we can use the supernovas to calibrate redshifts for distance. Redshift is the shifting of the spectrum of light (increase in wavelength) because of the velocity of its source. Detecting the light from the object and incorporating Hubble's law into our calculations, we can figure out the distance of the object from Earth.
As of now, we have departed from the realm where the word "distance" or "light years away" even makes an ounce of sense; and entered a region where it is impossible to determine what the 'proper' distance is. It becomes model dependent. This is not only due to the galaxies moving away from us, but also from the expansion of space, which stretches the light coming from those galaxies. So most scientists nowadays forgo the whole process and leave it at 'redshift of six'. which is extremely misleading to someone who has no access to the context behind it.
The best way to not get lost in the abyss of miscommunication, is to start at the bottom of the metaphorical space ladder and ask a fundamental question: so how do we even measure distance in space?