???????
Imagine a playing field. You whimsically pick up a handful of sand from the same. Looks really small with respect to the field. But let us do one better. You pick up an individual sand particle and dissect it under a microscope into its constituent atoms. That’s about how large a terrestrial planet looks on a galactic scale. Our own planet, in this respect looks just as significant as its 100 billion counterparts in our own galaxy. But sometimes, the most insignificant of things carry the most value. So what is it that brings our attention to the very place we call home?
Well, for starters, let us consider the fact that on Earth, days are getting longer and that this has something to do with the moon! Systems of celestial bodies as massive as the earth and the moon are subject to significant mutual interactions, known as “tidal forces,” the uneven pulling of the moon by the earth (and vice versa). If you are wondering, yes, this is the same interaction responsible for tides on Earth. It is remarkable to note that a phenomenon as simple as this is responsible for a number of different observations. For instance, when tidal forces become too big, they cause a planet’s moon to disintegrate, giving rise to ring systems. But maybe we are not lucky enough to see that for our own planet.
The moon causes the earth’s ocean to bulge locally, which makes the spinning speed slower. However, no reason to be too happy, as it would take about another 200 million years to add an hour to your day!
The same tidal interaction is also the reason why the moon is drifting apart from us at a rate of about 3.78-38 cm per year (even the changes in earth’s climate can play a huge role in this, as the formation and melting of glaciers affect the oceans, which then affect the moon). How amazing is that!
Not satisfied yet? How about when we say that the Earth’s poles flip after certain intervals? Mind you; we are talking about magnetic poles here. Otherwise called geomagnetic reversals, these reversals are believed to be a natural tendency induced by the dynamo action, the reason behind our planet having a magnetic field in the first place; some even believe it to be triggered by external events, such as collisions of extra-terrestrial matter with earth. 183 reversals have occurred over the past 83 million years, the last one happening approximately 780000 years ago. Reversals on Earth seem to occur when the field strength is low. Despite this sounding like the plot for some apocalyptic movie, no definite relationship between reversal and extinction in the past seems to exist. So, not a lot to worry about!
Source:
Google Images
What would happen if the earth were to become cooler? Some may agree that it would change for the better. But what if it cools down so much so that even liquid water becomes scarce? Yes, we are talking about the ice age here. And yes, we are moving towards an ice age, at least in theory.
Ice ages, which are prolonged periods of reduced temperature, accompanied by ice sheets and glaciers present beyond the poles, occur due to a set of cyclic variations of the earth’s orbit around the sun. These cycles, called Milankovic cycles after the Serbian geophysicist and astronomer Milutin Milankovic, are a consequence of the eccentricity of the orbit, its axial orientation and precession. The interplay of these three causes the Earth to go through extended periods of glaciation and warmth.
Earth is currently in the interglacial period, called the Holocene. Under the right conditions, the next ice age is expected to have begun in around 50000 years. Thankfully, the human-generated greenhouse gases emitted into oceans and the atmosphere is predicted to prevent this for the next 500000 years.
THE MYSTERY MASS ON THE MOON
What could be hiding behind the largest crater on the Earth’s moon? “Imagine taking a pile of metal five times larger than the Big Island of Hawaii and burying it underground. That’s roughly how much-unexpected mass we detected”.
As Peter B James quoted in his Journal. The South Pole-Aitken Basin is a gigantic impact structure on the far side of the moon, with an inner rim extending approximately 2,000 kilometres [1,200 miles] in the long-axis dimension. The structure and history of this basin are illuminated by gravity and topography data, which constrain the subsurface distribution of mass. These data point to the existence of a large excess of mass in the moon’s mantle under the South Pole-Aitken Basin. This anomaly ... likely extends to depths of more than 300 km [about 200 miles].
It is most likely a metal of some kind, given its density and the fact that it is weighing the crater basin floor down by more than half a mile (0.8 km). An ancient asteroid impact would be a logical solution. Computer simulations of large asteroid impacts suggest that, under the right conditions, an iron-nickel core of an asteroid might be lodged into the upper mantle of the moon (the layer between the moon’s crust and core) during an impact, in this case the impact that created the South Pole-Aitken Basin. Researchers analysed data from spacecraft used for NASA’s Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) mission to measure very small changes in gravity around the moon. When we combined that with lunar topography data from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), we discovered the unexpectedly large amount of mass hundreds of miles underneath the South Pole-Aitken basin. One of the explanations for this extra mass is that the metal from the asteroid that formed this crater is still embedded in the moon’s mantle.
Source:
Google Images