???????
EXOPLANETS
Exoplanets are planets that are outside the solar system and orbit another star system. It is not necessary that they must orbit a star, some exoplanets are free-floating and are not bound to any star, called Rogue Planets. They are believed to exist in billions, out of which around 5500+ are confirmed by us. The closest known exoplanet to Earth is Proxima Centauri b, which is about 4 light years away.
They are categorized into 4 types:
1] Gas Giant:
Like in our Solar System, the gas giant planets include Jupiter and Saturn, similarly exoplanets that are similar in size to Jupiter or Saturn and even much larger than them are Gas Giants. They are mostly composed of helium and hydrogen. They have whirling gases atop a solid core rather than hard surfaces. Compared to anything in our solar system, gas giant exoplanets can be significantly larger than Jupiter and located much closer to their sun. These are often known as “Hot Jupiters”. They were among the first exoplanets found, having temperatures soar to thousands of degrees. Due to tight orbits, they change their star’s light spectrum by pulling them in different directions resulting in easy detection of the giants. They circle their parent stars in as few as 18 hours. Using NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope, researchers discovered evidence in 2007 that gas-giant planets originate rapidly, in the first 10 million years of the life of a star similar to our Sun. It’s hard to imagine the formation of planets having large sizes near their parent star and experiencing intense environments. There are three hypotheses for how they are formed like that:
These gas giants may form far from their parent star, possibly past a region known as the snow line, where solid materials such as ice may form. These giants have substantial cores that may readily form above the snow level. These planets then begin to orbit their stars closer after creation.
One theory suggests that they form while the star is surrounded by a disk of gas and dust. Then, the gas giant's orbit may be disrupted and driven inward by the disk's gravity interacting with the planet's mass.
According to the third theory, hot Jupiters approach their star later in life, when their migration may be accelerated by the gravitational pull of nearby planets.
51 Peg B was the first planet discovered around a Sun-like star in 1995 and it was a gas giant.
Let’s have a look at a few gas giants:
i) KELT-9 b:
This ultra-hot Jupiter orbits the B-type star KELT-9 around 677 light years away from Earth. It weighs around 3 times the mass of Jupiter and has a surface temperature of around 7800 F, hotter than some stars. It was discovered in 2016 and is the hottest known exoplanet as of now. It orbits its star in 1.5 days only. The planet's tremendous radiation exposure from its host star is causing it to experience a rapid atmospheric escape.
ii) KEPLER-7 b:
It is about half the mass of Jupiter but nearly 1.5 times its size. The discovery of this planet was announced in 2010 and is one of the first five planets discovered by KEPLER. It takes 5 days to orbit its parent star and is located around 3000 light years away from Earth. It is the first planet beyond our solar system to get a rough cloud cover map.
2] NEPTUNIAN:
The exoplanets that are similar in size to Neptune or Uranus in our Solar System. Although the interiors of these types of exoplanets might vary, they would always be rocky and feature heavy metals at their cores. The atmospheres of these planets are usually dominated by helium and hydrogen. Thick clouds on Neptunian exoplanets frequently obstruct all light, concealing the atmosphere's molecular signature. Through spectroscopy, which measures the quantity of light blocked by the planet at various wavelengths, scientists try to identify the compounds that make up the atmosphere of such planets.
One of the missions aimed for this purpose is NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS), which finds planets smaller than Neptune that have transit stars bright enough to allow for additional spectroscopic studies that may yield information about the composition of the atmospheres of the exoplanets. According to a study, Neptune-mass worlds might be the most typical kind of planet to develop in planetary systems' frigid outer regions. A couple of the above-categorized exoplanets are:
HAT-P-26:
This distant planet is located approximately 437 light years away from Earth and orbits a star roughly twice as old as the Sun. It has a primitive atmosphere that is almost entirely made of hydrogen and helium, according to research that combines data from NASA's Hubble and Spitzer space observatories. Though the planet is not a water world, the researchers discovered that the atmosphere of Warm Neptune is largely free of clouds and has a significant water signature.
GJ 436 b:
It is located just 33 light-years away and has a temperature of around 800 K. The hot planet circling a star outside of our solar system does not have methane, a component shared by many planets in our solar system, according to data discovered by NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope. Scientists speculate that it might be mostly composed of a strange type of water- an "ice" that is hardened by pressure instead of temperature.
3] TERRESTRIAL:
Planets that are half of Earth’s size to twice its radius are considered Terrestrial planets. Earth-sized and smaller terrestrial planets have stony environments made of rock, silicate, water, and/or carbon. They generally have a solid or liquid surface dominated by rock or iron.
TRAPPIST-1:
In 2017, the discovery of 7 Rocky worlds was announced by NASA, out of which three of them are firmly in the habitable zone of the star TRAPPIST-1. All of the planets are thought to have potential for water on their surfaces. They are located about 40 light-years away in the constellation Aquarius. TRAPPIST-1 exoplanet system is named after The Transiting Planets and Planetesimals Small Telescope (TRAPPIST) located in Chile.
The innermost planet, TRAPPIST -1b, has a rocky core and is encircled by a thicker atmosphere than Earth. 1c has a thinner atmosphere but a stony core as well. The mass of 1d, the lightest planet, is around thirty percent that of Earth. The only planet in the system that is somewhat denser than Earth is called 1e, and it is also the planet that most resembles Earth. Because 1f, 1g, and 1h are far from their host star, there may be ice covering their surfaces that is made of frozen water.
4] SUPER-EARTH:
These are the planets that are smaller than Neptune and Uranus but more than twice the size of Earth. They might be made of gas, rock, or both. The term "Super-Earth" solely describes its magnitude; it does not necessarily imply any resemblance to Earth. They have the potential to be ten times as large as Earth. These planets could come in a multitude of forms, such as snowball planets, water worlds, or perhaps mostly made of dense gas like Neptune.. Let’s have a look at a couple of them:
55 Cancri e:
It is located 41 light-years away from Earth and is also referred to as “Toasty Super-Earth”. It has two sides: the night side is significantly colder and stays in the dark, while the day side is constantly frying beneath the scorching heat of its star because this planet is tidally locked by gravity to its star. The hottest side is nearly 2,700 Kelvin and the coolest is 1,400 Kelvin.
GJ 15 A b:
It was discovered in 2014 and lies 11 light-years away in the constellation of Andromeda. It takes about just 11 days to orbit around its host star and has a mass 3 times that of Earth. It is super-heated with a surface temperature of about 550 Kelvin. It also has a gas giant companion GJ 15 A c that forms the exoplanet system containing 2 planets.
The study of these exoplanets adds information to our study of the formation of planets and the development of life beyond our solar system. The discovery of more such rare and unusual worlds opens the door to multiple possibilities in the evolution of celestial bodies and their chemical composition.