???????
Rudimentary Analysis of the Global Orbital Space Launches 2023
To support an ever-expanding space economy, there are currently nearly 7500 active satellites in Earth orbit, with an average of 50 taking to the sky every week. Many of these satellites operate as part of a multi-satellite constellation, providing commercial applications ranging from remote sensing and communications to navigation. Governments are also increasing their satellite fleets for multi-mission deployments. In the future, more space exploration, the launching of commercial space stations, and even tourism could lead to an increase in launch needs.
New companies are entering the market day after day, and much uncertainty remains about their ambitions and those of more traditional players. As a result, forecasts for the number of constellations, and thus required launch capabilities, vary significantly. While government (military and civilian) launch demand is still substantial and increasing, the fastest growing segment is the private sector, driven by technological advances and decreasing costs that have encouraged innovation and commercialisation.
Consider the case of quarters 1 and 2 of the year 2023. In quarter 1, about 40% of the total orbital launches came from SpaceX alone, followed by CASC, contributing to about 23% of all orbital launches. A similar trend was observed in quarter 2, where SpaceX topped the charts again with a contribution of 50% of total orbital launches, followed by CASC with about 13% of total orbital launches. The contribution by spaceX becomes even more significant concerning the mass-to-orbit values. In quarter 1, SpaceX launched about 230,000 Kg of upmass, which is humongous because the other agencies have launched about 60,000 Kg combined. SpaceX managed to cross the 200,000 Kg mark in the next quarter, too, on its way to becoming the most significant contributor to the space economy.
The following bar graph depicts the number of spacecraft launched by major space agencies in the first quarter of 2023:
Credits: A picture taken from the Brayce Tech Q1 2023  article
Going by the exact stats, SpaceX launched about 233,114 Kg of spacecraft upmass in Q1, followed by CASC with about 23,965 Kg. The other space agencies that made a significant contribution in the first quarter of 2023 include Roscosmos at third and ISRO at fourth, contributing nearly 23,093 kg and 5,466 kg of upmass to space, respectively. The other significant players in the first quarter of 2023 include the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency(JAXA), Rocket Lab, IDF, Expace, Galactic Energy, Virgin Orbit, Relativity Space, etc. In addition to these prominent contributors, these space agencies and organisations' collective efforts have significantly propelled space exploration advancements during the first quarter of 2023, marking a substantial leap forward in our pursuit of understanding and utilising outer space.
Credits: A picture taken from the Brayce Tech Q1 2023  article
The cumulative efforts of these space agencies and private entities signify a collective dedication to pushing the boundaries of space exploration. As they forge ahead into the rest of 2023, these endeavours promise exciting scientific discoveries and technological innovation advancements. Beyond the weight of materials launched lies the immeasurable importance of human ambition, innovation, and the inexhaustible curiosity that drives us to explore the unknown. These strides expand our scientific knowledge and inspire humanity's collective imagination. As these agencies chart their courses through the rest of 2023 and  beyond, the weight they carry into space pales compared to the boundless possibilities they bring back to Earth—propelling us closer to a future where the stars are within our grasp.