???????
A siren wailed! Two short bursts and one long. Martian 74 rolled off her bed. It was her call. Grumbling, she hurried down the corridor to the reconnaissance station, glancing at the weather forecast once. It predicted clear weather with a temperature of -77oF. Some freak storm must have come up and covered the equipment in the dust. Indeed at the equipment hold, she got some intel, “A dust devil close to the excavation site, small enough to be ignored as a blip on the satellite cameras.”
Such are the situations the Martian settlers will have to face on the Red Planet. The dust covering the solar panels and the equipment, already running on low power, prevented them from harnessing enough power to drive the equipment forcing an immediate shutdown after sending a distress signal. The reconnaissance team will now have to set out, lugging heavy life support systems. But it is not the heaviness but the lightness of the equipment that will bother them. A person on Mars will have to go through rigorous exercise rounds every day, or else their muscles will atrophy in the low Martian gravity (38% of that on Earth). Bones would demineralise, and the calcium dumped from them into the bloodstream would lead to hypercalcemia. And that was only the beginning of the damage that the low gravity would wreak on their bodies if they strictly did not follow the fitness guidelines.
Not to mention the cold Sun glaring down on the recon team as they made their way to the site. Seemingly distant, the Sun haunted the pink sky peppering the land with deadly radiation. The cosmic rays also bombarded the planet's surface all day round. A level of about 233?Gy a day, already seventeen times the level on Earth, could fry living tissue when amplified to fifty times the normal value during solar flares and coronal mass ejections. The Boron and interspersed hydrogen in hydrogenated boron nitride nanotube-impregnated suits can effectively block most neutrons and other energetic particles coming from outer space, thus protecting the Martian explorers from radiation. In recent years the idea of developing magnetic force fields around the explorers to shield them from the harsh conditions on Mars is also progressing. For example, an extensive magnetic field can protect the inhabitants back at the shelter. If generated by a pumpkin arrangement of superconducting toroids, the field is both concentrated within the residential region and cheap to produce (owing to the superconductivity of the materials), providing excellent shielding against charged particles. The superconductors forged of magnesium bromide impregnated in a Ti-Al structure will also have the structural strength necessary to weather the Martian storms.
A routine inspection of the Martian’s suits and equipment on daily missions must pay proper attention to the oxygen cylinder. The life-sustaining oxygen can be created by splitting Martian carbon dioxide using low-temperature plasma technology. The non-equilibrium condition of the plasma constituents will facilitate the decomposition of the Martian carbon dioxide to oxygen under conditions similar to that on the surface of Mars.
Occasional nutrition for the crew will include microbes grown on algae vats. Created with the aid of a species of Anabaena, grown in bioreactors containing elements directly from the Martian soil, the algae will serve the role of plants, converting raw inorganic matter to organic edible matter, which could be used further to feed other more palatable organisms. The main course may include rigorously preserved food like Cajun chicken or granola bars which will have to retain their nutritious quality throughout the journey to Mars and back. The food will not be as varied as an Earthly cuisine, but scientists are trying to include tomatoes and mustard among the plants to be grown on Mars. The farmers will have to resort to hydroponics and aeroponics to grow plants, as the limited habitable space will prevent the development of conventional farms. Aquaponics take this method one step further by including aquatic animals like shrimp and fish like tilapia in the farming equation. These organisms will control the growth of harmful anaerobic bacteria in the water while providing food to the colonizers concurrently. Altogether they also form a natural recycling system, which will reduce the need to supply nutrients to the plants through artificial means.
The power to drive all these processes cannot be driven solely by Solar energy. Nuclear power will have to be depended on to provide a bulk of the energy supply. The settlers will have to live on radioactive fuel from the earth until sustainable mining infrastructures can be set up on Mars to mine the in situ radioactive material. Even before this, we have to make manageable nuclear reactors that can be carried to Mars while providing power the whole way.
While humanity is all set to start a new journey to the red neighbour, what we discussed are some of the numerous problems that need to be critically addressed. The success of our effort to colonize Mars all depends on how effectively we tackle these issues.
Source:
Google Images
The pumpkin configuration of superconducting toroids
Source:
Google Images
MOXIE, an experimentally successful attempt to create oxygen on Mars