???????
Mercury has the most eccentric orbit of all planets. Eccentricity here is not exclusive to the mathematical definition, as in this case, mercury displays eccentric characteristics if seen from the linguistic definition of the word as well. Mercury's orbit has an eccentricity of 0.206, the highest of all planets. For comparison, the eccentricity of the Earth around the sun is 0.016, around 12 times less than that of Mercury.
In 1843, French astronomer Urbain Le Verrier began studying the motion of Mercury. In 1859, he published a report containing a long list of mercury's position over a few years and found that Mercury's perihelion was undergoing precession. Precession is the rotational movement of the axis of the body due to an external torque. In Mercury's case, its point of closest approach to the sun is not fixed but slowly moves around the sun. If we were to trace Mercury's orbit for a long time, it would resemble petals in a flower. Using Newtonian mechanics, Verrier predicted precession due to the gravitational pull of other planets to be 527"(arcseconds) per century from an inertial celestial frame. However, Verrier's observations showed 565" per century. There was an error of 38 arcseconds which was unaccounted for.
Scientists tried to explain this abnormality using the fact that the Sun’s shape is not a perfect sphere but more of an oblate spheroid, which, turns out, does play a role, as Mercury experiences non-uniform gravitational pull due to the shape, but this effect is very minute. Le Verrier predicted the possibility of another planet called 'Vulcan' to be causing this phenomenon. Using the same rationale, Verrier had earlier predicted the presence and location of an 8th planet, exterior to Uranus' orbit, and this prediction was confirmed in 1846 with the discovery of Neptune. Since there was no discrepancy in Earth's motion and orbit, the missing mass must not affect Earth and must be nearer to the Sun than Mercury's orbit. This hypothetical planet led to people making false claims, like spotting objects moving across the Sun. With no credible sightings of any such planet, by 1890, almost nobody in the scientific community believed its existence.
Upon subsequent observations, the precession was observed to be 575" per century. In 1882, Simon Newcomb corrected some inconsistencies in Verrier's calculations and, upon repetition, found the calculated precession to be around 532" per century. There was now an extra perihelion shift of 43". Newcomb figured that the error probably arose from Newton's Law of Gravitation, which may not be as accurate as previously believed. This doubt on what had been at the core of classical mechanics and had been long accepted to be true was truly a revolutionary thought.
Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity resolved the answer to this anomalous discrepancy. As per general relativity, if we can imagine gravity as curved space-time, any massive object can bend space-time. In 1915, Einstein explained the curvature of space-time by massive objects and how other objects would travel along the path described by it. Einstein devised several equations to define this curvature mathematically. He applied these equations to planets and discovered that his equations boiled down to Newton’s equations with the addition of an extra term. As this term is inversely proportional to r3, it becomes particularly significant in Mercury’s case as it is very close to the Sun. Due to this curvature in spacetime around the sun, Mercury's orbit undergoes a slow rotation in the direction of motion, thus accounting for the anomaly. Upon calculations, this excess perihelion shift is found to be 43" per century for Mercury and 8.6" and 3.8" for Venus and Earth, respectively. After adding these to the previous calculations, the observations match with a high order of accuracy.
The perihelion precession of Mercury was one of the three "classical tests" of general relativity proposed by Einstein as observational evidence. It showcased the shortcomings of classical mechanics and was a true paradigm shift. It showed the need for new-age physics that described nature more accurately and paved the way for an unprecedented era of scientific discovery.
Source:
Google Images
Source:
Google Images