???????
Climate change has become a global concern over the last few decades, and there is news about the drastic increase in global temperature and sea level almost every day. While the world is going crazy behind this topic, let us discuss an intriguing question.
"Do the recent changes in the climatic conditions of our planet has anything to do with the Milankovitch cycle, which describes the collective effects of changes in the Earth's movements on its climate over thousands of years? "
Named after Serbian geophysicist and astronomer Milutin Milankovi?, the Milankovitch cycle is based on two key ideas.
i)Earth’s climate is strongly affected by how much sunlight the northern latitude gets during the summers.
ii)The amount of sunlight received changes based on the orbit and rotation of the earth.
So why does the earth’s climate strongly depend on northern latitudes?
Well, it has something to do with the ice cover in northern latitudes. When sunlight strikes the ground, a large part of it will get absorbed as heat. But if it falls on a deck covered with ice, the white ice will reflect a considerable amount of the light, making the climate cool, which will further assist the ice formation. Both the northern and southern hemisphere of the earth contains ice. But the area that the ice covers is more for the former than the latter as it has more land area. The lower heat capacity of land compared to water will enable it to change its temperature faster, which will further allow it to form ice with ease. The more the ice more the reflection, and the cooler the temperature will be.
Source:
Google Images
During winters, no matter what is going on in Earth’s orbit, the arctic circle will be in twilight for 24 hours a day, expanding the ice cover. The variable here that affects the climate is not the increase in ice cover but the proportion of this ice that will melt during summers, which indeed depends on the amount of sunlight received, which you might think will be a constant but not. Milankovitch cycle states that over hundreds of thousands of years, the amount of summer sunlight received can change between - 15% to +15%. The variation in sunlight, according to the Milankovitch cycle is a cumulative effect of three long-term cycles, namely obliquity (The angle at which the earth’s axis is tilted to the earth’s orbital plane), eccentricity (the distance between the sun and earth), and precession (the direction at which earth’s axis of rotation is pointed)
1. Obliquity (Tilt)
At present, the earth’s axis of rotation is inclined at an angle of 23.5
o
. This value is not a constant as other bodies in our solar system gravitationally affect the earth, thereby nudging it up and down. When this axial tilt increases, the earth receives more summer sunlight, leading to an increase in the melting of ice. With less ice, only a small amount of sunlight will get reflected away, making the earth globally warm. Thanks to our massive moon, that earth cycles up and down only once every 41,000 years.
2. Eccentricity
Earth’s orbit is not circular. It is elliptical, meaning it has a farthest point and a nearest point. The difference in the distance between Earth’s closest approach to the Sun, which occurs on or about January 3 each year, and its farthest departure from the Sun on or about July 4, is currently about 5.1 million kilometres, a variation of 3.4 per cent. That means each January, about 6.8 per cent more incoming solar radiation reaches Earth than it does each July. The massive planets like Jupiter and Saturn both nudge the Earth, causing its orbit to shift slightly over a period of 100,000 years. This slight variation thereby affects the amount of sunlight received.
3. Precession
Earth’s axis is moving in a circle like a slightly tilted top. This phenomenon is called precession. Axial precession makes seasonal contrasts more extreme in one hemisphere and less extreme in the other. The present axial precession is such that the earth will be at its perihelion during the northern winter and will be at its aphelion during northern summers, thereby moderating the seasons in the north. But in the next 13000 years, due to precession, the scenario will get reversed, leading to a moderate climate in the southern hemisphere and an extreme climate in the northern hemisphere, melting more ice and thereby making the climate warmer.
Source:
Google Images
Where are we now in Milankovitch cycle?
According to the Milankovitch cycle, three cycles affect the climate, obliquity, eccentricity, and precession. About 9000 years ago earth’s tilt was very high, indicating a warm climate. It has been gradually decreasing since then, and at present, we are at a medium-level tilt, implying a moderate climate. At the moment, the Earth is orbiting in a nearly circular orbit. When Combining eccentricity with precession to predict how far the sun is during northern summers, we get that around 9000 years ago, during the northern summers, the earth was in perihelion, while at present, the earth is at aphelion during northern summers. Thus we were in a warm period 9000 years ago, while now we are in a cold period. So, according to the Milankovitch cycle, the earth is cooling down gradually, and by this time, it should be in a mild ice age era. But the present data about the sea level and global temperature do not go hand in with this prediction. So what other things happened in the past 9000 years which made the Milankovitch cycle predictions go wrong? Well, about 10,000 years ago, we started cultivation. To expand farming, millions of trees were cut down, which eventually released the carbon stored in their body into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The Chinese discovered rice cultivation which led to the release of methane into the atmosphere. Industrialisation, which started in the 18th century, speeded up the rate of release of carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere. Which ultimately leads to the variation in our climatic conditions. And the answer to our question, ‘Is the Milankovitch cycle responsible for recent climate change?’ is NO. It’s our activity that causes these present changes in our climate.