Neutron Stars
Living on the line between imagination and reality, neutron stars are one of the most fascinating celestial bodies that physics must fully understand. The internal workings of such a body are still a buzz in modern physics and astronomy.
Stars, just like all entities in our cosmos, are not constants. They, too, go through a life cycle and evolve as they age. Again, not all stars are the same, so they all go through different life cycles and die through different means. Neutron stars are born when stars above eight solar masses exhaust their fuel supply. It balloons into a supergiant star and produces iron at its core through successive stellar nucleosynthesis. Extracting energy is no longer possible, and it starts imploding. Extreme temperature and pressure build, breaking the iron nuclei into protons and neutrons. As this is happening, the outer shell of the now doomed star implodes inwards at 25% of the speed of light. Finally, the protons in the core are transformed into neutrons through electron capture, releasing a torrent of neutrinos. The combined energy of this neutrino release and the shockwave of the envelope rebounding off the core triggers a supernova explosion blowing the star apart. If the core remnant at this point is less than three solar masses, the neutron degeneracy pressure just about manages to halt the complete collapse into a black hole. A neutron star is born.
Neutron stars are a fascinating focus of research, and there are a lot of mysteries associated with their internal workings and what strange phenomenon lies beneath their impenetrable shells made of the hardest material known in the universe: hyperdense neutron matter.
One experiment, conducted by a Germany and US space agency collaboration, concluded by telling us about the higher pressure in the intermittently dense regions of the neutron star. The experiment used data from the heavy ion collisions and the gravitational wave detection, which was carefully modelled using theoretical modelling, revealing the interiors of the neutron
star to us. But it also revealed the controversy in the pressure in the intermediate regions and the supranuclear regions of the neutron star.
A new study by an international research team consisting of scientists from Germany, the US, the Netherlands and Sweden, which includes data from gold-ion collision experiments conducted at GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung in Darmstadt as well as at Brookhaven National Laboratory and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in the U.S., has shown promise to provide a radical new approach to study the interior of these extreme objects. Their study was published in the journal Nature. An astounding finding of the experiment displayed the heavy ion collision data obtained from the collision of gold ions in the particle accelerator showed great similarity to the heavy ion signature of a neutron star.
Including this data has been critical to adding new constraints in the density region where astrophysical observations and nuclear theory are less conclusive. In the future, combining data from HIC experiments and Multi-messenger astrophysics information has proved viable for exploring supranuclear density neutron matter. There is great hope that in the coming years, improved constraints from these heavy ion experiments will further help weed out uncertainties in experiments probing even higher densities to uncover the mysterious properties of these city-sized atomic nuclei.