Did you know some planets wander in space without a parent star? We will be able to unveil the cosmic insights we're looking for within this article.
Rogue planets are interstellar objects of planetary mass that are not bounded by the gravitational force of any star. They originate from planetary systems in which they are formed and later ejected. They get ejected from their star systems due to the gravitational tug of the heavier planets. They can also form on their own, outside a planetary system from the collapse of a gas or dust cloud, similar to how stars are formed, but these are formed without the formation of a central star.
Can we detect them? Yes, we definitely can! But, it is pretty tricky as they don’t emit their own light, so scientists have different approaches to detecting them.
One of the approaches is gravitational microlensing. In this approach, when the rogue planet passes nearly in front of another star, the light rays of the background star bend due to the gravitational attraction of the rogue planet.
Let's come to our universal question now! Is life possible?
Rogue planets are generally cold and have extremely low temperatures as they don’t receive heat from their parent star. They only retain heat from their formation or due to the ongoing internal processes. The absence of a heat source excludes them from possessing suitable conditions to host life. Some rogue planets have natural satellites like the Moon to Earth. These moons or exomoons could be as warm and wet as Earth. A study suggests that some of the exomoons of rogue exoplanets could hold habitable conditions.
Now, let's talk about their moons!
Some scientists have explored the possibility of life on exomoons equivalent to Earth’s mass which orbits the rogue gas giants of mass comparable to Jupiter. The scientists then looked for the presence of an atmosphere and liquid water. They also explored the cosmic radiation and gravitational effect of the rogue planet on its moon. The conclusion was that under specific conditions and assuming stable orbital parameters over time, liquid water can be formed on the surface of these exomoons. The final amount of water for an Earth-mass exomoon is smaller than that in Earth's oceans but enough to host the potential development of life.
The rogue planets remind us that there is so much we don't yet know about the universe. Instead of being afraid of the vastness, let's be excited about its fantastic possibility! Let's explore the unknowns and satisfy the insatiable hunger for curiosity!