The Mystery Behind Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs)
Puzzling scientists since their discovery in 2007, fast radio bursts (FRBs) stand as one of the most captivating phenomena in the field of astronomy. These bursts, characterized by highly energetic radio waves, continue to elude us in terms of their exact cause, despite numerous speculations.
An FRB is an extremely bright transient radio wave pulse coming from a faraway galaxy, of duration ranging from a fraction of a millisecond to 3 seconds. An average FRB is estimated to release as much energy in a millisecond as the Sun does in three days. Radio telescopes detect these radio bursts. Some of them are repeating as they keep coming back again and again, while others are one-offs. Repeating FRBs are thought to originate from magnetars, which are neutron stars with extreme magnetic fields, while the origin of the one-offs still remains a mystery.
The first fast radio burst detected and named Lorimer Burst FRB 010724, was discovered by a group of researchers at West Virginia University in 2007. They used archived data from an observation made by astronomers back in 2001 with the Parkes Radio Telescope in New South Wales. They had observed a giant burst of radio wave lasting one-thousandth of a second. What caused such a one-off burst puzzled the astronomers, as there was high speculation as to whether it came from space or nearby electronic devices. It was not until the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder (ASKAP), a next-generation radio telescope, came into the world of radio astronomy that we better understood the scale of FRBs. One FRB discovered by the ASKAP came from a distant galaxy that took 3.5 billion years to reach us. The energy it released in one-thousandth of a second is what the Sun would in an entire year. Also, for such high energy to be released in such a short time, the source would have to be very small in size, in this case, not more than 10 kilometres in diameter.
Scientists have come up with numerous hypotheses for the origin of FRBs. Possible explanations include rapidly rotating neutron stars, mergers of compact objects like black holes or neutron stars, energetic supernovae, etc. One recent discovery points to one of these explanations as the possible origin. A gravitational wave event known as GW190425 was detected by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) in April 2019, two and a half hours before a Canadian radio telescope spotted a powerful FRB in the same patch of sky. Researchers estimated a less than 1% chance that these two events were not related to each other. When two neutron stars collide, they might form a bigger, rapidly spinning neutron star, which is unstable and soon collapses into a black hole, possibly giving off an FRB. Though the observation is not definitive proof that neutron star mergers cause one-off FRBs, it does hint at this connection.
Fast Radio Bursts have enthralled scientists and the public alike with their mysterious nature. As more radio observatories continue to scan the sky for FRBs, it is hoped that these observations will help us answer broader questions surrounding the universe, its origin and the unseen forces encompassing it.