Humanity and Earth have always witnessed countless storms throughout their lifetime. The longest one ever recorded on Earth was Hurricane John in 1994, which lasted 31 days, traveling a distance of 13,000 as it wandered across the Pacific Ocean. This storm, which can be called monumental by Earth standards, is nothing compared to the vast, iconic, churning red hurricane of our giant sibling, Jupiter, which has been there for at least the last 375 years, with more than twice the speed of the fastest one on Earth. Ever since its discovery in the seventeenth century by Giovanni Domenico Cassini, this giant typhoon called the Giant Red Spot(GRS) has always been a topic of discussion with various mysterious questions like: why is it swirling for centuries? What gives them the churning red colour? Why is it staying on one spot? And the most discussed one, will this enigmatic cloud disappear anytime soon?
Located 22 degrees south of Jupiter's equator, GRS is a high-pressure region twice as broad as the Earth, producing gigantic storms in the anticlockwise direction. With a period of rotation of about six Earth days or fourteen Jovian days, the wind speeds on the edges of these oval-shaped rotating clouds reach up to 430-680 km/h while they stay relatively calmer at the centre. Confined within two jet streams, the eastward-moving atmospheric band to its north and a westward-moving band to its south, these streams formed this giant storm and made them stay in one place, unlike Earth. The lack of solid surface on the gas giant also adds to the longevity of this fast-moving gale. On Earth, the power of a hurricane comes from warm vapour evaporating from the sea, which releases heat into the air. Under the right conditions, this creates a low-pressure area with warm air rising and cooler air getting sucked in at the bottom. Since the Earth spins at a higher velocity closer to the equator, winds traveling towards the low-pressure area begin to curve, causing the hurricane. A hurricane will start dissipating once it reaches land, where it no longer receives the warm vapor it needs to keep the cycle going. Since Jupiter does not have the contrast of ocean and land, nothing will halt the fast-moving storm, making them active for centuries.
Today scientists know the Great Red Spot is there and it has been there for a while, but they still struggle to learn about its composition and properties, and it’s mostly Jupiter’s fault. In a gaseous planet a thousand times as big as Earth with a liquid ocean of hydrogen surrounding its core and a thick layer of atmosphere that can even trap radio waves, investigating the red spot with orbiting probes and telescopes will not yield accurate results. Though available data from Jovian missions and telescopes predicted that Jupiter’s upper atmosphere has clouds consisting of ammonia, ammonium hydrosulfide, and water, and the reddish hue of the storm is due to the irradiation of the hydrogen sulfide layer with the cosmic rays from the sun, these are not yet scientifically proved and are still in dark!
Today scientists know the Great Red Spot is there and it has been there for a while, but they still struggle to learn about its composition and properties, and it’s mostly Jupiter’s fault. In a gaseous planet, a thousand times as big as Earth with a liquid ocean of hydrogen surrounding its core and a thick layer of atmosphere that can even trap radio waves, investigating the red spot with orbiting probes and telescopes will not yield accurate results. Though available data from Jovian missions and telescopes predicted that Jupiter’s upper atmosphere has clouds consisting of ammonia, ammonium hydrosulfide, and water, and the reddish hue of the storm is due to the irradiation of the hydrogen sulfide layer with the cosmic rays from the sun, these are not yet scientifically proved and are still in dark!
In recent years there have been a bunch of dire warnings about the great red spot dying in the press. While in the scientific world itself, there are controversies regarding this, let us take a brief look at the two sets of arguments. As the oval-shaped storm contracts and becomes more circular, it also grows taller and changes color, becoming a more intense orange. While the data from the Voyager mission and Hubble telescope are in favour of this comment, thereby supporting the news about the demise of this enigmatic red cloud, some scientists are against this as a decrease in the area of the cloud does not imply the shrinking of the vortex. Since the area of the spot cloud is larger than its underlying vortex and the swirling gas that defines it, to understand the health of the spot, planetary scientists need to study the health of its vortex and not its cloud. Since the current observation is about the clouds, they strongly argue that with this information, one cannot say whether it is on the verge of flaking or not.
Whatever be the end of this debate, the great red spot has always been the most intriguing Jovian factor and knowing more about Jupiter and its Great Red Spot could help scientists understand Earth’s weather system better as both the weather functions under the same physics.
Source:
Google Images
Source:
Google Images