???????
All four gas giant planets in our solar system have rings that orbit around them. Still, the rings of Saturn are unique among all of them as they are so big and bright that even in 1610, Galileo Galilei observed them using an ordinary telescope but could not identify them. So, he wrote that Saturn is not alone but surrounded by three ears (he called rings ears at that time), which are stationary to each other. Later in 1655, Christian Huygens confirmed this ring as a disc.
Saturn's rings are made of ice and rock that vary in size. Some are as small as a grain of sand, others as large as a house. There are two main theories regarding the origin of the inner rings of Saturn. An idea that Édouard Roche proposed in the 19th century suggested the rings be formed from the debris of what was once a moon of Saturn(named Veritas, after a Roman goddess who hid in a well). As per the theory, the orbit of said moon decayed until it was close enough to be ripped apart because of tidal forces. A variation on this theory assumed that the moon disintegrated after being struck by a giant comet or asteroid.
Not to mention the cold Sun glaring down on the recon team as they made their way to the site. Seemingly distant, the Sun haunted the pink sky peppering the land with deadly radiation. The cosmic rays also bombarded the planet's surface all day round. A level of about 233?Gy a day, already seventeen times the level on Earth, could fry living tissue when amplified to fifty times the normal value during solar flares and coronal mass ejections. The Boron and interspersed hydrogen in hydrogenated boron nitride nanotube-impregnated suits can effectively block most neutrons and other energetic particles coming from outer space, thus protecting the Martian explorers from radiation. In recent years the idea of developing magnetic force fields around the explorers to shield them from the harsh conditions on Mars is also progressing. For example, an extensive magnetic field can protect the inhabitants back at the shelter. If generated by a pumpkin arrangement of superconducting toroids, the field is both concentrated within the residential region and cheap to produce (owing to the superconductivity of the materials), providing excellent shielding against charged particles. The superconductors forged of magnesium bromide impregnated in a Ti-Al structure will also have the structural strength necessary to weather the Martian storms.
The second theory states that the rings formed from the remnant nebular material from the formation of Saturn. There is another version involving the disrupted moon theory where a moon of diameter 400-600 km, slightly larger than Mimas, was disrupted during the Late Heavy Bombardment 4 billion years ago, and the debris used in the formation of the rings are from the disrupted moon. A recent variation of the above theory is that the ring represents the remnants of the icy mantle of a Titan-sized, differentiated moon, which was stripped of its outer layer as it spiralled into the planet during the formation period of Saturn when a gaseous nebula still surrounded it. This theory also explains why the ring is composed of ice and dust particles and the lack of rocky material in it.
The rings of Saturn are divided into seven divisions, A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, labelled in the order in which they are discovered. Apart from these, there are some other subdivisions in which names are given in honour of scientists, including Cassini, Roche, Janus, Methone, Anthe, Pallene, and Phoebe. The main rings contain regions of A, B, and C rings, and the Cassini division, located between A and B rings, is primarily made of large dust particles and contains Huygens's gap.
‘A ring’ lies at the outer part of the Cassini division and is the outermost part of the main rings. It contains the Encke gap and Keeler gap, which are maintained by orbital resonances with a different set of values with varying moons of Saturn. The B ring is the largest and brightest main ring with a width of around 25500 km and is located between the C ring and the Huygens gap. The B ring contains specific structures called spokes, which appear with varying brightness in backscattered and front-scattered light. The C ring is wide but faint and known as a Creep ring as it is made of darker material than A and B rings. The Colombo gap, also known as the Titan ringlet, lies in the inner C ring, while the Maxwell gap lies on the outer part of the C ring, which is similar to the Epsilon ring of Uranus. The D ring is the innermost ring that extends inwards to Saturn’s cloud containing three ringlets.
The E ring is the largest of all rings, with a width of around 300000km and many microscopic ice and dust particles. The orbits of Titan and Mimas are also in this E ring and also contain polar jet emissions like on Enceladus called tendrils. The F ring is on the outer edge of the A ring discovered by Pioneer 11 spacecraft. The ring is shepherded by two moons in which Pandora orbits outside and Prometheus orbits inside. The G ring, which is very faint and thin, is located between the F and E rings. The moons Methone and Anthe are associated with two different faint arc rings called Methone ring and Anthe ring, respectively. A faint ring called Janus/Epimetheus ring present between the orbits of Janus and Epimetheus is formed by the matter obtained during the blast of meteoroids to the moon’s surface. The Phoebe ring is a disk of material obtained in the interior of the Phoebe moon.
Most of these observations are done using Flyby missions of Voyager 1, Voyager 2, and Pioneer 11 spacecraft, along with the Saturn Exploration mission of the Cassini Huygens Space probe. Telescopes like the Hubble space telescope and Spitzer space telescope significantly contributed to exploring detailed knowledge of these rings. Because Ring material is continuously falling down into Saturn, and since this rate of falling is increasing, one day, we will not see this beautiful ring of Saturn anymore. Astronomers predicted that in the next 100 million years, Saturn would become a ringless gas giant.
Source:
Google Images
Source:
Google Images