???????
Neptune, the eighth planet from the sun in our Solar System, is a deep blue giant which is dark, cold, and whipped by supersonic winds. Far larger than Earth, at more than 17 times Earth's mass and nearly 58 times Earth's volume, Neptune goes around the sun once roughly every 165 Earth years and has completed its first orbit since being discovered in 2011. Neptune's rotation axis is tipped toward its orbital plane by 29.6°, somewhat larger than Earth's 23.4°, thus giving the seasons nearly equal length, just like us.
The presence of the outer giant planets of our solar system holds our solar system together in its present state of condition. Any deviation in the orbit of these planets can affect the rest of the companions in the system. Although there is no chance of Neptune suddenly disappearing, let's imagine it for the time being and see what havoc it may do to the solar system. Of course, let us also consider if we could survive without Neptune, even for a brief period. What impact will it have on Earth, and how? Let's also briefly examine what gives this planet its characteristics of deep blue colour.
Source:
Google Images
What effect will the sudden disappearance of Neptune have on other planets?
We think Neptune is not basking in the same light of glory as the other planets. How often do we hear about Neptune anyway? If Neptune suddenly disappeared from our solar system, not much would change. Pluto would have an altered orbit, and Uranus would shift closer to Saturn. On Earth, probably only astronomers would notice the difference since Neptune is the only planet not visible to the naked eye.
What effect will even a slight change in the orbit of Neptune by a flyby would bring to the solar system?
We already know gravity can greatly influence cosmic objects as they make their way through space. We see this constantly in how the Sun's gravity pulls comets from the edge of our solar system inward. Researchers found that if Neptune gets pulled out of its orbit by just 0.1%, it could mean catastrophe for our solar system.
Researchers from the University of Toronto set out to study and understand how sensitive the solar system's stability is. In this study, they created nearly 3,000 simulations to determine the least amount of influence that can make considerable changes in our solar system. They only considered passing stars (or stellar flybys) as an influence for this study. In one of their simulations, they found that if a flyby could pull Neptune out of its orbit by 0.1%, it could be disastrous for Mercury and Venus. In some rare cases, Earth crashed into Mars instead. They found that moving Neptune by this relatively small amount could increase the instability of our solar system by as much as ten times.
Source:
Google Images
Is there really any chance of Neptune being influenced by any flyby and inviting an inevitable catastrophe for the Solar System?
To your horror, Yes! It is possible. Neptune, the farthest planet from the Sun, has a better chance of being influenced by a stellar flyby. The likelihood of such a significant celestial event is slim, but the probability isn't zero. Researchers say it could take millions or billions of years before an event like this could happen. What makes it terrifying is that the star doesn't need to be as big as the Sun to cause this, and secondly, we might not be able to see it coming since that star doesn't need to be close to the solar system either.
Why is Neptune so Blue?
We think Neptune is not basking in the same light of glory as the other planets. How often do we hear about Neptune anyway?
Patrick Irwin, a planetary physicist at Oxford University, and his team set out to study the atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune and discovered something interesting. Both Neptune and Uranus are similar in size, mass and atmospheric conditions, yet Neptune appears significantly bluer than Uranus.
Previous research already indicates that the blue colour of Neptune and Uranus can be associated with methane in the atmosphere(as it absorbs red light coming from the Sun). The research by Patrick Irwin suggests that the colour difference can be attributed to a layer of haze found on both planets. The model involves three layers of haze at different heights in the atmospheres of each planet. The middle layer, just above the methane condensation level, is thicker on Uranus than on Neptune.
Neptune has a more turbulent atmosphere than Uranus. Neptune's atmosphere is more efficient at churning gaseous methane into the haze layer, condensing the haze particles that produce methane snow. This action removes more of the haze and keeps Neptune's haze layer thinner than it is on Uranus, making Neptune appear bluer than Uranus.
In contrast, excess haze on Uranus builds up in the planet's comparatively sluggish atmosphere giving it a lighter tone than Neptune.