???????
Now that we already know the components of the Starship, we can now look at how it gets us to Mars. The Raptor powers the Starship, claimed to be the highest thrust-to-weight engine.
During the launch, the super-heavy rocket will accelerate the ship to a certain extent, detach from the spacecraft and return to the launching site for reuse. At the same time, the latter continues its journey to Low Earth Orbits. When it reaches the LEO, it will run out of fuel. At this point, the main Starship needs to be refilled. So we send up tanks to refill the Starship in orbit. All this launching may seem very expensive, but considering the reusability of the Starship, the only expenditure will be on the fuel and not on the ship. SpaceX claims that the rendezvous, docking, and refuelling of the Starship will be automated. The refuelled Starship can now continue on its journey to Mars.
The landing on Mars poses quite a lot of issues. Having a stronger gravitational field than that of the moon, we cannot use the methods used by the Apollo Missions. The earlier Mars missions generally used parachutes and thrusters, which is difficult, especially when there are passengers inside.
Usually, the parachutes slow down the vehicle, and the thrusters help in landing, but SpaceX has decided to go into thrusting directly. This has its own set of issues. If you are wondering why we can’t directly thrust and slow down the spacecraft, it is because of turbulence. When your ship is traveling at supersonic speeds, and you thrust to slow down the spacecraft, the thrust and the shockwave in front of the ship can behave in ways we are not fully aware of. In some cases, it may even cause the rocket to go faster and cause turbulence that may cause damage to the rocket.
NASA, during its Curiosity mission, wasn’t willing to take the above-mentioned risks, so they used the parachute to slow down the craft and used thrusters after its speed went subsonic. This is called subsonic retro propulsion.
SpaceX intends to use supersonic retro propulsion, i.e. thrusting when the craft is at supersonic speeds. They have already tested it on Earth and are confident about landing on Mars.
In case you felt we missed out on the orbital mechanics needed to reach Mars, refer to our previous articles on our series Road to the Red Planet.
Vehicle Landing Simulation By SpaceX:
Simulation