???????
While there are millions and billions of stars in our universe, what draws our attention is the one residing at the centre of our solar system i,e, The Sun. 4.5 billion years ago, the collapse of the solar nebula in the Orion spur of our milky way galaxy gave birth to this yellow dwarf star. Besides being remarkable with its nuclear reactions, tremendous gravity, and helping humankind to sustain life, this yellow dwarf has its own peculiarities lying over its surface, Sun’s Magnetic Field.
The Sun is a massive ionized ball of plasma composed of electrons and ions, and when these charged ions move, they create strong magnetic fields and corresponding electric currents. This motion creates a lot of activity on the Sun's surface, called solar activity. The Sun's surface may be quite active at once but quieter at other times. The intensity of these activities is not constant but fluctuates as the 11-year-long solar cycle progresses. Sunspots, solar flares, and Coronal Mass Ejections (CME) are some of the phenomena caused by these fluctuations in the magnetic field as the solar cycle advances. Let us now dig a little deeper into these phenomena :
1. Sunspots:
Sunspots are transitory dark spots on the Sun's photosphere that are darker than the surrounding region. They are areas of lower surface temperature induced by magnetic flux concentrations. The magnetic field is so powerful that it prevents part of the convective currents carrying the sun’s heat from reaching its surface. They develop in pairs, generally with opposite magnetic polarity, within active zones. Sunspots are made up of two primary structures: a center umbra and a penumbra that surrounds them. The umbra is the sunspot's darkest zone, and it is here that the magnetic field is greatest and perpendicular to the Sun's surface, or photosphere. A brighter zone known as the penumbra may entirely or partially encircle the umbra. The penumbra has a higher inclined magnetic field than the umbra and is made up of radially elongated formations known as penumbral filaments. Sunspots have a diameter ranging from 16 km to 160,000 km (more than 10 times the radius of Earth), and they grow and compress as they travel around the Sun's surface. The solar cycle comprising the maximum number of sunspots is termed as solar maximum, while the last ones are designated as solar minimum.
2. Solar Flares:
The sun is more like a fluid than a solid ball. It has differential rotation, which means that depending on latitude, the surface moves at various speeds. The magnetic field lines become wrapped up because of this, which can result in a solar flare, which is a quick burst of energy. Flares occur when accelerated charged particles, mostly electrons, interact with the plasma medium. All layers of the solar atmosphere, the photosphere, chromosphere, and corona are affected by solar flares. The plasma medium is heated to tens of millions of Kelvins, and electrons, protons, and heavier ions are propelled to relativistic speeds. Flares emit electromagnetic radiation at all wavelengths, from radio waves to gamma rays, spanning the electromagnetic spectrum. Most of the energy is dispersed over frequencies outside of our visual range; therefore, most flares are invisible to the human eye and must be viewed using specific tools. Flares are seen in active areas, often surrounding sunspots, where powerful magnetic fields penetrate the photosphere and connect the corona to the solar interior.
3. Coronal Mass Ejections (CME):
A coronal mass ejection (CME) is a large burst of plasma consisting of electrons, protons and a magnetic field from the Sun's corona to the solar winds. Solar flares are one of the consequences of these CMEs. In the sun’s atmosphere, plasma gets confined in arch-like structures by the strong magnetic fields called coronal loops. Sometimes, these magnetic field lines in the plasma break and reconnect with each other, thus releasing a massive amount of magnetic energy. This energy goes into the kinetic energy of the solar flares and into thermal energy, which is believed to be the reason why the sun’s corona has a temperature of the order of millions of Kelvins. The Sun produces three CMEs per day around solar maximum but only one every 5 days near solar minima. An interplanetary coronal mass ejection (ICME) occurs when a CME penetrates interplanetary space. ICMEs can reach Earth's magnetosphere and collide with it, causing geomagnetic storms and aurorae and in rare situations, damage our electrical power grids.