???????
In the 1930s, astronomers used spectroscopy to measure the temperature of Venus’s upper atmosphere. They found it to be about 240 K, not much different from that of Earth’s stratosphere. Taking into account the cloud cover and the planet’s nearness to the Sun and assuming that Venus had an atmosphere much like our own, researchers concluded that Venus might have an average surface temperature only a few degrees higher than Earth’s. In the 1950s, however, when radio observations of the planet penetrated the cloud layer and gave the first indication of conditions near the surface, they revealed a temperature exceeding 600 K! Almost overnight, the popular conception of Venus changed from lush tropical jungle to arid, uninhabitable desert.
Venus’s atmosphere is much more massive than our own, and it extends to a much greater height above the planet’s surface, because of which Venusian surface has a crushing air pressure of 92 atm! The surface temperature soars up to a sizzling 880 degrees Fahrenheit. The main component (96.5%) of Venus’s atmosphere is carbon dioxide. Almost all of the remaining (3.5%) is nitrogen. However, there is no sign of a large amount of water vapour that would be present if a volume of water equivalent to Earth’s oceans had once existed on Venus and later evaporated. If Venus started off with an Earth-like composition, something happened to its water, for the planet is now an exceedingly dry place.
At a height of 50 km above the surface lies large, fast-moving clouds of sulphuric acid that extends upto 70 km. Upper-level winds reach speeds of 400 km/h relative to the planet. Venus takes 243 Earth days to rotate one time, but its atmosphere circulates it every four days. Extremely fast winds cause the atmosphere to drag along the surface of the planet as it circulates, slowing its rotation while also loosening the grip of the sun’s gravity. Below 30 km, it shows a polar vortex—a relatively stable, long-lived wind flow circling the planet’s south pole. Polar vortices are well known to atmospheric scientists and are expected in any rotating body with an atmosphere. Earth’s south polar vortex plays an important role in confining and concentrating the gases responsible for our planet’s Antarctic ozone hole.
But why is Venus so hot?
Given the present composition of its atmosphere, Venus is hot because of the greenhouse effect. Venus’s dense atmosphere is made up almost entirely of a prime greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide. This thick blanket absorbs about 99 per cent of all the infrared radiation released from the surface of Venus. It is the immediate cause of the planet’s sweltering 730 K average surface temperature.
Venus started off like Earth, then why is its atmosphere now so different from Earth’s?
The terrestrial atmospheres did not come into being along with the planets themselves. Instead, they developed over millions of years as secondary atmospheres, made up of gases released from the planets’ interiors by volcanic activity, a process called outgassing. Volcanic gases are rich in water vapour, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogenic compounds. On Earth, as the surface temperature fell and the water vapour condensed, oceans formed. Most of the carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide are dissolved in the oceans or combined with surface rocks. Solar ultraviolet radiation liberated nitrogen from its chemical bonds with other elements, and a nitrogen-rich atmosphere slowly appeared. The basic mechanism controlling the level of carbon dioxide in Earth’s atmosphere is the competition between its production by volcanic (and human) activity and its absorption by the rocks and oceans that make up our planet’s surface. This constant recycling of atmospheric carbon dioxide is known as the carbon cycle. The presence of liquid water accelerates the absorption process. Carbon dioxide dissolves in water, eventually reacting with surface material to form carbonate rocks. At the same time, plate tectonics steadily releases carbon dioxide back into the air. The level of carbon dioxide in Earth’s atmosphere today is the result of a balance between these opposing forces.
The initial stages of atmospheric development on Venus probably took place in much the same way as just described for our planet. The real difference between Earth and Venus is that the greenhouse gases in Venus’s secondary atmosphere never left the atmosphere as they did on Earth. Indeed, if all the dissolved or chemically combined carbon dioxide on Earth were released back into our present-day atmosphere, its new composition would be 98 per cent carbon dioxide and 2 per cent nitrogen, and it would have pressure about 70 times its current value. In other words, apart from the presence of oxygen (which is a consequence of life on Earth) and water (whose absence on Venus will be explained in a moment), Earth’s atmosphere would look a lot like that of Venus.
To understand what happened on Venus, imagine taking Earth from its present orbit and placing it in that of Venus. Being closer to the Sun, our planet would warm up. More water would evaporate from the oceans, leading to an increase in atmospheric water vapour. Because the ability of both the oceans and surface rocks to hold carbon dioxide diminishes with increasing temperature, more carbon dioxide enters the atmosphere. The additional greenhouse heating would warm our planet still further, leading to a further increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases, and so on. This runaway greenhouse effect would eventually lead to the complete evaporation of the oceans, restoring all the original greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. The same thing must have happened on Venus long ago. leading to the planetary inferno we see today. The greenhouse effect on Venus was even more extreme in the past when the atmosphere also contained water vapour. By adding to the blanketing effect of the carbon dioxide, the water vapour helped push the surface of Venus to temperatures perhaps twice as hot as at present. At those high temperatures, the water vapour was able to rise high into the planet’s upper atmosphere—so high that solar ultraviolet radiation broke it up into its components, hydrogen and oxygen. The light hydrogen rapidly escaped, the reactive oxygen quickly combined with other atmospheric gases, and all water on Venus was lost forever.
Source:
Google Images
Can there be life in the upper atmosphere of Venus?
Many miles above its surface, however we meet conditions that are among the most benign of those found in the extra-terrestrial solar system. Venus’ lower atmosphere is thick, hot, and dominated by thermochemistry. Its upper atmosphere is cold and dominated by photochemistry, rather like the Earth’s upper atmosphere. But the cloudy layer between the two at heights of about 50km above the surface is more interesting. Spectroscopic observations showed dark, strange streaks that are absorbing ultraviolet radiation, a phenomenon that could be an evidence of microbiological life. Thus there is a serious possibility that forms of bacteria with metabolic pathways that can take advantage of anoxic, hyper-acidic conditions might have evolved to float in that layer of the Venusian atmosphere where the pressure is 1 atm, and the temperature is 70 degrees Celsius.
Source:
Google Images