Ultraluminous X-ray source ( also known as ULX) is a highly energetic astronomical source that emits an unusually large amount of X-ray radiation. They are so radiant that they can outshine the Eddington limit or Eddington luminosity. The Eddington limit or Eddington luminosity is the maximum luminosity that an astronomical body (such as a star) can achieve when there is a balance between the force of radiation acting outward and the gravitational force acting inward. ULXs were first discovered in the 1980s by the Einstein Observatory.
A few theories that were made to explain ULX were :
Stellar-mass black holes: ULXs might be binary systems consisting of a stellar-mass black hole, which accretes matter from a companion star. The intense X-ray emission arises from the accretion process.
Intermediate mass black holes(IMBHs): ULXs are powered by intermediate-mass black with masses between stellar mass black holes and supermassive black holes found in the centres of galaxies. The presence of IMBHs in ULXs could explain their high luminosity.
Beamed emission: The observed luminosity of the ULXs might be due to beamed emission. The apparent luminosity can be enhanced if the X-ray emission is focused on a narrow jet or cone. Still, the total energy output remains within the expected range for a stellar-mass black hole.
Accretion onto neutron stars: ULXs could also be powered by accretion onto neutron stars. Neutron stars are extremely dense remnants of massive stars, and when they accrete matter from a companion star, they can emit intense X-ray radiation.
Stellar processes: Certain stellar processes, such as super-Eddington winds or accretion towards magnetars(highly magnetised neutron stars), could also produce ULX-like emissions.
.
In 2014, NASA’s Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR) data showed that the ULX named M82 X-2 is a neutron star. Neutron stars form when a star dies and collapses like a black hole.
This high density also creates a gravitational pull at the neutron star’s surface about 100 trillion times stronger than the gravitational pull on Earth’s surface. Due to high gravitational pull, gasses and other materials are accelerated to millions of miles per hour, releasing tremendous energy when they hit the neutron star’s surface. This produces the high-energy X-ray light NuSTAR detects.
Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech